hello everyone welcome to the next
lecture in the course theory of
computation and in this lecture we will
be seeing one more example of
deterministic finite automata in order
to make DFA clear to us we need a lot of
practice we need to practice designing
DFAS and that is why I am stressing more
on the examples so in this lecture we
will see how to construct one more DFA
all right so let's get
started okay so here is our task
construct a DFA that accepts any strings
over AB that does not contain the string
a a BB in it so we are to construct a
DFA over the alphabets
ab and it should accept all strings over
AB but it should not contain the
sequence a a BB in it this sequence
should not be present it should always
reject whenever this sequence is present
and it should always accept all other
sequence so how can we do
this so here our alphabet sets or our
inputs
are A and B okay A and B are our
alphabet sets or our
inputs okay so when we see this question
we may think how can we do this this
seems to be a very tough job how can we
do this okay it's not very tough job we
can simplify this problem instead of
doing this right away we can simplify
this problem and make this problem
simpler so let us try to let us try to
design a simpler
problem a
simpler problem let us modify this
question in order to
make it simple now how can we do
this okay so here is how we simplify
this
problem instead of constructing a DFA
that does not contain AABB in it let us
construct a DFA that accepts all string
over AB that contains the string a a BB
in it I think that is more simple we can
construct a DFA over AB that contains
the string a a BB in it all right let us
first construct this this seems to be
this sounds to be more simple so let us
construct this and later we will convert
it to this form all right so let's see
how we can do
this so when you whenever we start
constructing a DFA what we how do we
first start we need to have a starting
state so here I'll have my starting
State as a I'll call it a and I give an
arrow this way indicating that this is
the starting state and a can either get
inputs A or B right so what happens when
it gets input a and what happens when it
gets input B so if a gets the input
small letter A then what happens I will
send it to the next state which I will
call State B why I need to get this
sequence a a BB right it should accept
everything that contain this sequence
so when a gets the
input small
a it goes to B yeah I want it to proceed
why because I'm am trying to get this
sequence okay
and what about when a does not
get uh when a gets the input small B
right if a gets the input small B I let
it stay in a itself if it gets B it
stays in a itself because B should not
be my
starting letter it should be a so if it
gets a it proceeds to the next state but
if it gets B it stays in a itself okay
now I got a and I came to State B now
what happens in state B in state B if I
get the input a what will happen and if
I get the input B what will happen in
state B if I get input a I send it to
the next state which I call State C now
why do I do
that because I want the sequence a a BB
so I get the first a and I got the
second a right this is the second a so I
proceed to the next state but what if
what if B gets the input small B then it
should go back
to State a why
because if I get after getting a over
here if I get
another B what
happens I got a and if I get a B then
what happens my sequence becomes a no I
don't want a I want a a a a is not I is
what I want not AB so if I get B I send
it back to State a so it will start
again from here so my state B is
complete I have already mentioned what
happens if it gets a if it gets a it
goes to State C if it gets B it goes to
State a okay now coming to State C in
state C how should I proceed I got a a
now if I get B in state C I should
proceed to the next state so I'll call
my next state as state
D
and what is the sequence that I want a a
BB so I already got a a over here now
the next one is B so if I get
B if I get B in state C I let it proceed
to the next state okay I let it proceed
to the next state and what if I get
input a in state C what will happen or
what should I
do so in state
C if I get input a where should I send
it should I send it back to b or should
I send it back to a or should I keep it
in C
itself what I should do is I should
analyze it this way how did I come to
State C I came to State C from A to B
and then from B to C so we know that on
reaching State C we already got these
two inputs a and a I already got a a and
if I get B I go to state d but what if I
get a again if I get a again I don't
need to send it back to
State b or state a why that is because I
already got 1 2 3 and I could get b as
my next right in the next one I could I
could get B so that is why what I should
do is I should keep it in state C itself
right because on if I am in state C
itself then I can count from here a a b
and if I get another B it will be
accepted I hope you're getting my point
so
I keep this
C in C itself if the input
is a right so on reaching State C if I
get input B I proceed because yes I can
proceed but if I get input a that means
it could mean something like this right
I get another a so I keep it in a in
this C itself because in the next input
I may get a B so I keep it in C itself
so I hope that was clear so my C is
complete I already mentioned what
happens if I get a or b now coming to D
so on coming to
D if I get input a what will happen if I
get input B what will happen so on
reaching D what is my what is my how
many inputs that I get I got a a b so I
am here a a b now on state D if I get
the input B again then I can proceed to
the next state which is State
e right and if I get b i if I get B in
state D what is the condition of my
input it is a a b b so this string is
completed so if I get B it goes to State
e and state e should be my final state
or accepting
state state e should be my final state
State coming from D so I get a a b b a a
BB and when I reach here this should be
the final state right so that is about
State D if I get input
B okay now what will happen if I get
input a in state D we already mentioned
in if it gets State B it goes uh sorry
if it gets input B it goes to the final
state but if I get input a in state D
where should I send it back should I
keep it in itself should I send it to c
b or a let us check it out how did we
reate D what is the condition or state
of our input when we reach State D we
came from a and we got another a and we
got B so we got we got a
a b this is our condition a a b now our
question is if we get a again in this
state what will happen if I get a again
over here what will happen I get this
sequence a a b a now even if I get a
here or B here whatever I get here I am
not able to get this sequence anymore
right I cannot get back this sequence
whatever proceeds from here so I have to
send it back to this position where I
got my first a and then I have to try
and see if it can get this a a BB again
right I have to send it back to the
position where I got my first a and
where did I get my first a my first a I
got over here so so on getting first a
it reached State B so I have to send
this D back to
State B I have to send my D back to
State B if I get the input
a right so now my state D is complete on
getting a it goes back here on getting B
it
reaches final State e now what is left
our final state is left we did not
mention what happens if we get a or b in
our final state so in our final
State okay so when we reach our final
State we already got the sequence a a b
b a a b b now it does not matter what we
get after that it either we get a or b
it does not matter it stays in
the final state right it stays in
the
final State A or B stays in the final
final state so that completes our DFA
which accepts all string over AB that
contains the string a a BB in it all
right okay so is that the end of our
problem no that is not the end of our
problem because we have now constructed
the simplified problem we have
constructed the DFA that accepts all
string over AB that contains the string
a a BB in it but our main problem was to
construct a DFA that accepts all strings
over AB that does not contain the string
a a BB in it now how shall we do this
now we have this we have this DFA over
here which accepts all string that
contains AABB now we need to flip this
and make it in such a way that it does
not accept AABB in this now how can we
do this how can we do this this can can
be done in a very simple way that is by
flipping the states we can achieve this
by flipping the states what are we going
to do we are going
to
Flip Flip the
states now what do I mean by
this what I mean by this
is make
the
make the final State
into non-final
State
and make
the nonf final
States
into
final
States this is what I mean to flip the
states to flip the states means to make
the final States into non-final States
and make the non-final states into final
States in that way we can make this DFA
to accept all strings over AB that does
not contain the string a a BB in it all
right now let's see how we can do this
this is very simple all this States
which are not final States like a b c
and d make them final States and the
last state e which is a final State make
it a non-final state and all the other
things Remains the Same and then we can
achieve a
DFA which was mentioned so let us draw
this a was a non-final state so I make
it a final State how by putting a double
circle around it
and this is the starting State and and B
was
also not a final state so I make it a
final State I put a double circle around
it and C was also a non-final state I
make it a final state by putting a
double circle and C then
D which is also a non-final state I make
it a final State I put a double circle
and E was a final State I will make it a
non-final state I will give it only one
Circle so all the rest of the things it
Remains the Same just copy it down just
as it
was it is all the same so this is how we
can do it okay C stays here and C goes
here and d goes to
B and here D goes to e and e station
itself and let us mention the inputs
everything same just copy it down B here
a here B here a here a here B here
another a over here and B here and here
it is a and b so
this will
now accept any strings over AB that does
not contain the string a a BB in it so
we knew that
when you reges this e it contains a a BB
right and it was accepted for this case
but in this one whenever it contains a a
b b it reaches State e which is not a
final state so that string will not be
accepted and all other strings will
always be accepted in this for accepting
States so this is how we design a DFA
for this kind of a problem so whenever
you get this kind of a problem try to
make it simple
and then try to flip it and make it work
for the main problem so I hope this was
clear and please try to practice more of
these kind of examples to make the DFA
clear to you so I hope this lecture was
useful to you thank you for watching and
see you in the next
[Music]
one